Rewrite IPv6-only/NAT64 text based on design team discussion (#137)
tfpauly/draft-happy-eyeballs-v3: draft-ietf-happy-happyeyeballs-v3.md

This section describes how a client initiates DNS queries
and asynchronously handles the answers.

## Sending DNS Queries {#queries}

Clients first need to determine which DNS resource records
they will include in queries for a named host.

> This decision is based on if client has "connectivity" using IPv4

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This decision is based on whether the client has "connectivity" using IPv4
```

> and/or IPv6 on the current provisioning domain (PvD) {{?PvD=RFC7556}}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and/or IPv6 on the current Provisioning Domain (PvD) {{?PvD=RFC7556}}.
```

Generally, "connectivity" for an address family is defined

> as having at least one local address of the family from which

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
as having at least one non-loopback and and non-link-local ({{!RFC3927}},{{!RFC4291}}) address of that address family from which
```

Author: Fixed!

to start a connection attempt to the next address in the updated list, subject
to the Minimum Connection Attempt Delay.

# Handling NAT64 Networks {#nat64}

> NAT64 {{NAT64}} is an IPv6 transition protocol that allows

Reviewer: It would be nice to keep the mention of how most other IPv6 transition technologies don't need to be worried about because they are transparent to the client device

Author: Are you thinking we should call out examples, or just say "other"?

Reviewer: Nah I think "other" is fine. We used to says "many" :-P

Reviewer 3: I would argue that except for proxies, none of them is distinguishable from native v4 for a HE implementation or widely deployed => dom't care, perhaps not stress with "many"

in which the DNS resolver synthesizes A answers into AAAA answers.
However, with the prefix available from router advertisements {{PREF64}},
networks might choose to not deploy DNS64, as the latter has a number
of disadvantages (see {{Section 4.3.4 of ?V6-MOSTLY=I-D.ietf-v6ops-6mops}}).

To ensure compatibility with any NAT64 network, whenever the client
detects a NAT64 prefix, from either of the options reference above,
clients MUST send A queries in addition to AAAA queries (as
specified in {{queries}}). This allows the client to receive any
existing IPv4 A records and perform local NAT64 address synthesis,
eliminating the network's need to run DNS64.

## Synthesizing IPv6 Addresses

When a client has discovered PREF64, it can use the prefix to
synthesize IPv4 addresses into IPv6 addresses as defined in {{!RFC6052}}.

Such synthesis is performed by the Happy Eyeballs client any
time it has an IPv4 answer from DNS (from A records or IPv4
address hints received in SVCB/HTTPS records), or is being
asked to connect to an IPv4 literal address. The solution is similar
to "Bump-in-the-Host" {{!RFC6535}} but is implemented inside

> the Happy Eyeballs client.

Reviewer 2: OK, so here is the question: we say 'it can use the prefix to synthesize IPv6 from IPv4' but later we say 'the client MUST de-synthesize'. 
Let's say
    Case1: The client has only IP6 connectivity (no v4 address, and IPv6 address is 2001:db8::f00) but PREF64 has been detected. THe client gets back AAAA = 64:ff9b::192.0.2.1 and A=192.0.2.1

As we say later, the client MUST desynthesize, so the resulting destination addressers set would be {192.0.2.1}, with the only source address avaiable {2001:db8::f00}. 

Do we need to explain what happens? What ensures that  the address would be synthesized again?

The more I think about it, the more I suspect we might be introducing a lot of complexity here which could be avoided, as suggested by Lorenzo by updating RFC6724-bis to *depref* 64:ff9b:: (or any PREF64-derived addresses and prefer IPv4.

I guess we can talk about it during the session.

Reviewer 4: Just for info, 6724-bis is really 6724-update, so not a full republication, but such a change could in principle be added.  Also, 6724-update has been with the IESG now "in RFC Editor queue" for 318 days.

Author: The way I address this in the PR is:

> Synthesized IPv6 addresses (IPv4 addresses that have been synthensized into IPv6 addresses either locally using PREF64 or by a DNS64 resolver) MUST be treated as IPv4 addresses for the purpose of Happy Eyeballs grouping and sorting ([Section 5](https://ietf-wg-happy.github.io/draft-happy-eyeballs-v3/tfp/ipv6-only-redo/draft-ietf-happy-happyeyeballs-v3.html#sorting)).[¶](https://ietf-wg-happy.github.io/draft-happy-eyeballs-v3/tfp/ipv6-only-redo/draft-ietf-happy-happyeyeballs-v3.html#section-8.3-1)

This doesn't literally de-synthensize it.

Author: The one case where we'd need to actually use the v4 is in the VPN case

Author: I think what we end up with is that you never need to de-synthesize and re-synthesize, but you do need to check if the v4 address that is encapsulated is actually part of a VPN route and in that case, use the IPv4 address over the VPN

Reviewer 3: There are a few ways how to do that… both work fine for the VPN case

- de-duplicate NAT64 and A records and only keep the A
- turn NAT64 into A , re-synthesize if unreachable (within PvD)

The third alternative I see has the problem that is may end up using NAT64 even when there is a more specific v4 route
- keep NAT64 and just sort as it was v4

@furry13 I would argue that having a separate precedence for NAT64 is only needed in the last case and breaks for non well-known NAT64 prefixes.

Author: I added a commit to mention the de-synthesis and re-synthesis, which will handle the VPN case. Please check!

Note that NAT64 address synthesis is not always required or possible.
Some IPv4 prefixes are scoped to a given host or network and do not require

> synthesis, such as 0.0.0.0/8, 127.0.0.0/8, 169.254.0.0/16, and 255.255.255.255/32;

Reviewer 5: Maybe also mention local IPv4 routes that might be provided by some VPNs - in case VPN just pushes some IPv4 routes but does not change client's DNS resolver.

Author: @oskar456 with Jen, I updated the text to talk about checking for v4 routes in general. Given this, do think this is sufficient, or should we call out VPN specially?

Additionally, there are restrictions on the use of the well-known NAT64

> prefix ({{Section 3.1 of !RFC6052}}) for certain addresses.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```

https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-ietf-v6ops-nat64-wkp-1918/ is in the last call, removing this restriction.

Author: Sounds good!

## Sorting and Connecting on NAT64 Networks

Synthesized IPv6 addresses (IPv4 addresses that have been
synthensized into IPv6 addresses either locally using PREF64
or by a DNS64 resolver) MUST be treated as IPv4 addresses for
the purpose of Happy Eyeballs grouping and sorting ({{sorting}}).

IPv6 addresses received from AAAA records might come from DNS64
{{DNS64}}. Clients that are aware of the PREF64 value MUST check
to see if an IPv6 address received from DNS is actually an IPv4

> address.

Reviewer: I would revert the removal of the Last Resort Local Synthesis Delay. If we want to remove that, let's have a WG discussion about it and do it in a separate issue and PR

Author: I think we'll have a WG discussion for this whole this! But the reason I removed it is that I don't think it makes sense any more in the context of these updates.

The Last Resort Local Synthesis Delay is about when you send an A query to get the address to synthesize, when you're on a NAT64 network. The advice is now that you MUST send the A query any time a NAT64 prefix is known (which is a prerequisite to doing synthesis), so having another delay timer to do the same thing doesn't make sense.

Does that sound right? Anything I'm missing?

Reviewer: Oh you're absolutely right. SGTM

> address.

Reviewer: Why is the VPN section removed?

Author: Perhaps we need to add back parts of it, or just re-emphasize that this is all about what's on the same PvD. I'd like to get feedback from the group on what to say here, but I think the old text around DNS64 stuff doesn't apply generally anymore.

Reviewer: Yeah in my mind the main realization of this section was that if you get DNS from one interface and use it on another then things can get interesting. I think that still applies here: if the corporate VPN PvD is v4 only and the A record is for an address not in the corp VPN split tunnel routes then things break

Reviewer 3: We should treat VPN as implicit PvDs – It's all the same story. 

Did we mention that we MUST NOT do cross-PvD synthesis?

Do we need more text con cross PvD interaction (DNS from PvD A which has no default route but A/AAAA points to a prefix only reachable through PvD B)?

Reviewer 5: I read it like that the problem with VPN does not exist if we state that host must do A quieries and local synthesis of IPv6 destination address. But that only works if you treat VPN as being in the same PvD.

Reviewer 2: IMHO it would be better to define a generic logic of dealing with IPv4 and IPv6 addresses, and do not complicate the text with a dedicated VPN use case. If we get it right, the VPN scenario should just work and HE would not need to treat it differently.

Reviewer 6: It may be that we want to talk about "VPNs and PvDs" as a group?
This might be something worth pulling up to a top-level section to talk about this class of topics.  This touches on a few other areas as well, and from a read through abstracting this out could be useful especially as not everything may strictly use PvDs yet but may have equivalent concepts.

There are also topics like "must flush address cache when switching between networks lacking PvDs".  

So perhaps we have a general concept of "network interface context" (word TBD) which may be a PvD, a VPN, or a connection to a given network outside of a PvD.

> address.

Reviewer 3: How do we treat duplicate addresses, especially in the case we synthesized based on PREF64 and got the same address from DNS64?
